RFC: Monorepo (#336)
WordPress/openverse: rfcs/20221124-monorepo.md

↖️ Table of Contents

# RFC: Monorepo

**Status:** 🚧 WIP, comments are welcome nonetheless

## Reviewers

- [ ] &lt;your name here&gt;
- [ ] &lt;your name here&gt;

## Rationale

For a comprehensive discussion about the pros, the cons and the counterpoints to each see [discussion](https://github.com/WordPress/openverse/issues/192). This is not the purpose of this RFC.

This RFC summarily lists the benefits and then, with the twin assumptions of a monorepo being ultimately beneficial and the decision to migrate being finalised in the above discussion, proceeds to go into the implementation details.

### Exclusive benefits of monorepo

This only includes things that cannot be accomplished without the use of a monorepo.

> 1. Single place to go for issues, PRs and all activity. Currently tickets are scattered across several repos, and any tickets that could benefit more than a single layer must in opened in each of the different repos.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Single place to go for issues, PRs and all activity. Currently tickets are scattered across several repos, and any tickets that could benefit more than a single layer must be opened in each of the different repos.
```

small typo

- [ ] &lt;your name here&gt;

## Rationale

For a comprehensive discussion about the pros, the cons and the counterpoints to each see [discussion](https://github.com/WordPress/openverse/issues/192). This is not the purpose of this RFC.

This RFC summarily lists the benefits and then, with the twin assumptions of a monorepo being ultimately beneficial and the decision to migrate being finalised in the above discussion, proceeds to go into the implementation details.

### Exclusive benefits of monorepo

This only includes things that cannot be accomplished without the use of a monorepo.

1. Single place to go for issues, PRs and all activity. Currently tickets are scattered across several repos, and any tickets that could benefit more than a single layer must be opened in each of the different repos.

1. Singular copy (different from synced independent copies) of scaffolding code such as Git hooks, lint rules and common workflows. This is distinctly better than elaborate sync workflows.

1. Central place for all technical documentation, enabling documentation for different parts of the stack to cross-reference other pieces and stay current with changes in other places.

> 1. Enables the infra to deploy the code to coexist with the code itself. Apart from the private secrets that will still need to be encrypted, the IaC files could be organised identical to the code.

Reviewer 2: > the IaC files could be organised identical to the code.

Just a nit but this isn't entirely true. We could _maybe_ spread _some_ Terraform modules out this way but it would be a pain to have so many places to search for modules. If the Terraform code will be merged into the monorepo as well then it'd be better off assuming that it will live, in totality, in a separate directory.

Author: Ah, my lack of knowledge in the IaC space is really showing here. I would appreciate if you could add any infra issues (especially any dealbreakers) and any infra benefits that you see popping up due to this merge. Thanks!

Reviewer 2: From an infra perspective I don't think there are any benefits really. The only thing I could see is if we did this issue: https://github.com/WordPress/openverse-infrastructure/issues/220. The benefit of that issue could be a more easily reusable workflow with better variables in the deployment workflows we have now. Basically everything that is used to define the deployment workflows are variables that we could theoretically move into GitHub, thought it's just more manual management of those details. We could try to sync them other ways like with a GitHub secret of a JSON blob that gets passed through so the workflow call is something like:

```yaml
- uses: ./actions/deploy.yml
  with:
    config: ${{ secrets.NUXT_DEPLOYMENT_CONFIG }}
```

And then the workflow parses the JSON to get the configuration.

Note: For folks without access to the infrastructure repository, the issue above describes switching to a callable workflow instead of a composite action. I've found composite actions a little more tedious so I avoided trying to make the current deployment workflows super modular. I think a callable workflow would be easier to work with for a _lot_ of reasons and could open up the possibility of making a more module/generic single-deployment workflow file a little more realistic.

We could do all of this in our current setup, but a monorepo would end up with less places to sync the secrets to and less places to put the deployment action.

Actually, that reminds me, if the infrastructure is in the same repository, the deployment workflow outputs could be automatically merged whenever changes are made to them. Right now we have to manually sync them from the infrastructure repository to wherever they're needed. So that would be a nice simplification of that process as well (one less thing to remember to do!) :slightly_smiling_face:

1. The API and frontend form the "service" side of Openverse that directly faces the users (both API consumers and Search engine users).

1. The frontend uses ECS deployments and the API is well on the same track. This makes it possible for them to share some deployment code.

1. To the RFC author, the API and frontend are very familiar so merging them would be easier. Adding a third component would make the task daunting.

1. Merging incurs a productivity hit for the initial transition. So merging everything in one swoop is not ideal.

1. The API’s comprehensive tooling for developer documentation can benefit frontend devs and create a unified docs site for contributors.

1. The API is already organised by stack folders so the `frontend/` directory will fit right in with the others like `api/` and `ingestion_server/`.

1. The API and frontend share identical tooling for Git hooks, linting and formatting. We will fight our tools less and encounter minimal friction.

   - In fact, we employ a number of hacks to install and configure pre-commit for the frontend. Merging it with the API eliminates the need for such hacks.

> 1. The entire system can be integration tested during releases. The real API, populated with test data, can even replace the Talkback server.

Reviewer 2: Interesting idea! For this to be feasible, we would need to come up with a definitive solution to preventing the API from making network requests when it executes a search. Right now Playwright tests do not depend _at all_ on any external network and that needs to remain the case.

Author: I think it can be done (maybe something like an environment variable flag to not make requests) and I can envision it being glorious when it works.

> The `WordPress/openverse-api` repo will absorb the `WordPress/openverse-frontend` repo. The `WordPress/openverse-catalog` will also be merged, _later_.

Reviewer 2: Will there be a period of time during which frontend work is happening only in `openverse-api`? Is the long-term plan to merge everything into `openverse-api` and then eventually rename that to just `openverse`?

Author: Yes. The timeline will be 
1. pause work on the frontend
2. merge `WordPress/openverse-frontend` into `WordPress/openverse-api`
3. transfer issues and other relevant GitHub models 
4. get fronted functional
5. resume frontend work in `WordPress/opnenverse-api`
6. archive `WordPress/opnenverse-frontend`

The one week to one fortnight period mentioned in the RFC is the time between step 1 and step 5.

### Reference

I'm following the steps listed below in a fork at [@dhruvkb/monopenverse](https://github.com/dhruvkb/monopenverse/). You can refer to the fork, but note that it is a comes from a place of haste and has not been treated with the same level of love and care that the final treatment will receive.

### Step 0: Prerequisites

#### Get the timing right

> The first step will be to release the frontend, call a code freeze and pause work on it. This is to prevent the frontend repo from continuing to drift as we merge a snapshot of it with the API.

Reviewer 2: Should we schedule a bug bash before this so that we can identify and resolve any outstanding issues before we enter the period of time where we won't be able to without great disruption?

Author: Yes, that would be ideal (maybe even necessary). Before embarking on this potential two-week freeze, it would be best to have the frontend be in a state that could serve two weeks without maintenance.

If we have no high or critical priority tickets, that would indicate optimal time to work on this move.

Reviewer 2: If we are planning to do a bug discovery session during the Istanbul meetup in January, maybe targeting this for late February (or later/earlier depending on what bugs we find) could be good, provided everyone is on board. It'd be nice to know that ahead of time as well so that we could block off the time and expect frontend feature work to undergo a stoppage at a specific period of time rather than just "sometime in the future". Did you have any particular alternative scheduling ideas in mind?

Author: The bug bash we had in Venice was very productive so repeating it seems logical. But there are two potential issues with that:
- We only identified and filed issues in the last meetup, fixing them afterwards.
- I can't speak for everyone but my productivity immediately after the meetup was very low.

IMO the best time for this migration would be when all the frontend devs' productivity has gone down (less activity = easier migration) so if we could iron out the bugs **before** the meetup, the meetup would be the best time to migrate this because we'd all be together to collaborate in the migration process.

We do need to set down a date for this but we should only do this after the iframe removal project is deployed, and has been stable for a week or two. Other than that, we can make any time frame work.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should try to do a bug bash before the meetup then. We could even start the monorepo migration _during_ the meetup given the core contributors will not likely be spending much time making direct frontend contributions. That way we could easily pair on any unexpected issues that crop up.

Reviewer 3: The period of the code freeze is a big concern for me. 

Having a bug bash before it is a really great idea. It's really difficult to plan it because we probably need a sync meeting to identify bugs, [very rough estimates] a day or 2 to document all of them, and then 1-3 weeks to fix everything, especially considering the slow pace of the PR review process. We would probably only want to fix the `high` and `critical` priority bugs.

I wonder how this process be affected by the features that we plan to work on now: navigation menu improvements and the homepage. Also, if we plan to work on the addition of analytics next, would that need to be finished before the monorepo move? Or fully postponed till after the move?

Starting the monorepo migration during meetup is great for the reasons Sara mentions. However, I'm not sure that the process itself is a great use of our time at the meetup. Someone will have to be working on the migration steps during the meetup and in the week after that.

This can prove difficult given how productive our team is, so we will need to channel this productivity towards the catalog in the meantime. I can foresee the end-to-end migration taking one week (ideal scenario) to one fortnight (worst case scenario).

### Step 1: Merge with histories

This is a quick process.

> 1. Move the entire content of frontend inside a `frontend/` directory, except the following top-level files and folders. Please comment if you can add to this list.

Reviewer 2: What is the plan for making `pnpm` work in the monorepo? Do we want to go ahead and making `pnpm` live at the root of the repository and treat the frontend as a `pnpm` monorepo package? https://pnpm.io/workspaces

I think this would be necessary for us to be able to (reasonably) merge the browser extension and the JS that is currently in WordPress/openverse into the monorepo... otherwise we'll be fighting weird fights with pnpm in different directories :thinking:

Author: That was an issue. Currently I had everything working with `pnpm` with `package.json` moved into the `frontend/` directly (no package manager at the root), but I definitely should look into the `workspaces` feature.

   - `.github/`
   - `.editorconfig`
   - `justfile`
   - `.pre-commit-config.yaml`
   - `.prettierignore` (symlink into the `frontend/` directory)
   - `.eslintrc.js` (symlink into the `frontend/` directory)

>    - `.eslintignore` (symlink into the `frontend/` directory)

Reviewer 2: Why do these need to be symlinked?

Author: That's an error on my part. I was performing lots of experiments in https://github.com/dhruvkb/monopenverse and with linting to work so I tried almost everything. When I got it to work finally, I forgot to update the RFC with the right approach.

Author: Fixed in f2122d8.

   - <s>`.gitignore`</s> (better to move it into the `frontend/` directory and update some absolute paths)

> 1. Create the final commit on the `WordPress/frontend` repo. After the merge we might want to add a notice about the migration to the `README.md` file but GitHub's built-in archival process could suffice here.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. Create the final commit on the `WordPress/openverse-frontend` repo. After the merge we might want to add a notice about the migration to the `README.md` file but GitHub's built-in archival process could suffice here.
```

- renovate.yml
- rollback.yml
- ghcr.yml
- push_docker_image.yml

With this done, the development on the frontend can continue inside the subdirectory.

### Step 3. Buff the rough edges

There will be a few rough edges that I cannot foresee and we can continuously fix those as we spot them. But up to this point we should be in a position where
we can continue to build the API and the frontend independently but from one repo.

1. The action `banyan/auto-label` will need to be configured (`auto-label.json`) to add the "stack: \*" labels based on the modified directory.

### Step 4. Integration

This is the long term combination of code for the frontend and the API.

#### Combined lint

All lint steps can be combined in `.pre-commit-config.yaml`. This also simplifies the CI jobs can now be merged.

See the combined lint in action at [monopenverse](https://github.com/dhruvkb/monopenverse).

### Step 5. Documentation merge

The following documentation files will need reorganisation or merge.

- README.md (both repos)
- CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md (both repos)
- CONTRIBUTING.md (both repos)
- CONTRIBUTORS.md (API only; also why?)
- DOCUMENTATION_GUIDELINES.md (API only)

> - TESTING_GUIDELINES.md (frontend only)

Reviewer 2: We would probably want to move this into the frontend directory, I would think. It is extremely frontend specific. Or would it go into the Sphinx docs?

Author: My long-term goal is for Sphinx docs to be the single source of reference for all developers, not just API devs.

Some Markdown files that people generally look for in the repo root could be left there but ideally, even they would just point to the relevant Sphinx pages for the real stuff.

Reviewer 2: I love that plan!

- DEPLOYMENT.md (frontend only)

I will need more information about this because IANAL.

> - LICENSE (both repos)

Reviewer 2: Given Openverse still uses MIT we have probably very little to worry about here, FWIW.

Author: Nice, but I had a vague feeling that merging repositories could have legal implications for those that use them somehow.

↖️ Table of Contents

# RFC: Monorepo

> **Status:** 🚧 WIP, comments are welcome nonetheless

Reviewer: Is this still accurate? Or can we consider this complete? I would suggest if it's ready we add a completion date that review should be done by here and in the PR description. Moving forward we'll use a two-week deadline. This has already been open for 12-ish days, as I recall, but some folks are starting to share concerns, so I would suggest December 14th as a due date allowing for sufficient time for additional feedback.

## Reviewers

> - [ ] &lt;your name here&gt;
> - [ ] &lt;your name here&gt;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [ ] @zackkrida 
- [ ] @sarayourfriend 
```

Does this reviewer pairing seem okay? My rationale is that @sarayourfriend perhaps works across the most repositories the most often, and also authored some of the more critical actions related to releasing and deploying. And myself because for now I've been the most involved in the planning of projects.

Author: I like this. But I do want to stress that this affects everyone so I'd appreciate if everyone took at least one look (no comments necessary).

Reviewer: Definitely, I think it's very reasonable to expect everyone to read and consider the proposal.

## Rationale

For a comprehensive discussion about the pros, the cons and the counterpoints to each see [discussion](https://github.com/WordPress/openverse/issues/192). This is not the purpose of this RFC.

> This RFC summarily lists the benefits and then, with the twin assumptions of a monorepo being ultimately beneficial and the decision to migrate being finalised in the above discussion, proceeds to go into the implementation details.

Author: Right, I am sorry for assuming that we had a unanimous agreement. I have expanded the benefits section in 6ef0168 to present a stronger argument.

### Exclusive benefits of monorepo

This only includes things that cannot be accomplished without the use of a monorepo.

> 1. Single place to go for issues, PRs and all activity. Currently tickets are scattered across several repos, and any tickets that could benefit more than a single layer must be opened in each of the different repos.

Reviewer 4: Not something exclusive of a monorepo, you can already [view all the issues of Openverse repositories aggregated in a single page](https://github.com/issues?q=is%3Aopen+is%3Aissue+repo%3AWordPress%2Fopenverse-catalog+repo%3AWordPress%2Fopenverse+repo%3AWordPress%2Fopenverse-api+repo%3AWordPress%2Fopenverse-frontend+repo%3AWordPress%2Fopenverse-infrastructure), including the private infrastructure repo.

Reviewer 4: - What kind of bulk actions do you tend to do or would like to be able to do? I'm trying to imagine the use for mixed issues/PRs.
- I think the issue with the `gh` CLI can probably be solved with `just` commands on the `openverse` repo, which would require some configurations of course, but do you need to see often _all_ the open issues? For development one only typically need to focus on a well-defined subset.
- It's part of the GitHub UI in the sense that the link is always on the GH header, you only need to add the filters for the repos. I don't think new contributors need to look at all the issues to start either, approaching one individual level of the stack is more manageable.

Reviewer: @krysal I don't disagree with your comments. There are potential solutions and workarounds for many of the things that a monorepo offers. I don't think the benefits of a monorepo need to be things that _only a monorepo can do_, but things that a _monorepo might do a bit better_ also need to be considered. 

Regarding contributors looking at lists of issues, I don't think they need to see _all_ issues, either. But consider the ways users might look at the issues page. Speaking for myself, when I hear about a new project I'd like to contribute to I tend to:

- Click on the 'issues' tab in the GitHub UI to look at the top 5-10 issues and see what's actively being discussed, worked on, and engaged with in a project
- Sort by "most commented" to see what the biggest or most popular discussions are

I think it's fundamentally simpler for a contributor who wants to look at Openverse issues to go to one repo and click on the "issues" tab in the UI, rather than type filters or click on a link which was found externally.

Reviewer 2: > There are potential solutions and workarounds for many of the things that a monorepo offers

For me it isn't just this, but we should also be clear that there are trade-offs to using a monorepo, both long term and temporary. To me it's important that we agree that any benefits we think we'll get from it are worth the trade offs. That's why the conversation cannot just be "what are the benefits", it must be "what are the benefits and why are they worth making the change rather than working with what we have now". Monorepos can make a lot of meta infrastructural things more complex. The ci_cd workflow in the API repository is already complicated. A lot of actions will now run that don't need to, like Playwright for changes to the API. Playwright takes a long time to run. Is that a trade off we want? If we don't, we'll need to make a files filter, but that can only be applied to an entire workflow, so now we have to have separate workflows for different aspects of the projects, which is something we intentionally worked away from at one point. Is that something we are willing to accept?

A change like this is not just pure, uncomplicated benefits. It's not that we can do everything we're doing now but easier. There will be trade offs. Even just a bigger repository to check out can be an issue, more history to dig through, more complicated releases, etc.

1. Singular copy (different from synced independent copies) of scaffolding code such as Git hooks, lint rules and common workflows. This is distinctly better than elaborate sync workflows.

> 1. Central place for all technical documentation, enabling documentation for different parts of the stack to cross-reference other pieces and stay current with changes in other places.

Reviewer 4: What is wrong with old normal links? We can already cross-reference info if it's necessary.

Author: Hyperlinks can break when documentation is reorganised or reworded. Having references to the changed docs being in the same repo makes it easy for the PR author to update it as a part of the same PR and prevent the links from rotting or breaking. 

[Sphinx explains it better than I can](https://docs.readthedocs.io/en/stable/guides/cross-referencing-with-sphinx.html#cross-referencing-with-sphinx).

Reviewer 5: This has been a pain point for documenting our data models and ingestion/data refresh processes. IMO that's one concrete place where documentation (and the process of generating/updating that documentation) could improve in a monorepo.

1. Enables the infra to deploy the code to coexist with the code itself. Apart from the private secrets that will still need to be encrypted, the IaC files could be organised identical to the code.

> 1. Milestones that can span across multiple layers of the stack are only possible in GitHub. This is a limitation imposed by GitHub and there is no workaround for this.

Reviewer 4: I see manual meta issues as good enough workaround.

Reviewer: > I see manual meta issues as good enough workaround.

They definitely might be. We would need to establish some conventions and patterns for using them more effectively, but GitHub _did_ recently fix some bugs with showing the titles of issues from other repos. Here's an example of a cross-repo meta issue:

https://github.com/WordPress/openverse/issues/341

It's really nice! Meta issues are also much more flexible than milestones, as milestones do not allow for comments or discussion. Regardless of switching to a monorepo or not we might want to use meta issues more _anyway_.

One _minor_ benefit to the monorepo is that you get autocompletion of issues in the current repo, but not for cross-repo issues: 

![CleanShot 2022-12-06 at 12 12 32](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6351754/205977842-9d8ce4f2-1bcf-4c59-ac55-6e2f9990862c.png)

The [integration](#step-4-integration) section in the latter part of the document describes more interesting outcomes made possible by the monorepo. They may or may not be exclusive to monorepos but they're surely made easier by it.

## Migration path

> First we will merge the API and the frontend. This decision was made for the following reasons.

Reviewer 5: This reasoning makes a lot of sense to me, and I'm sold on merging API/frontend first and separately from the Catalog. How much more difficult do you anticipate eventually merging the Catalog to be? Do you think there's value in planning that work first, or can that be tabled until after the API/frontend are merged?

Author: I am fairly confident that merging the catalog would not cause major pain later on, mostly because it's another Python project like the API and ingestion server.

We could definitely plan for the eventual catalog-API merge, but I abstained from that in the RFC because
- I am not the most experienced with the catalog so I felt a bit underqualified to write about that in the RFC
- I didn't want to delay the RFC till I could understand the nuances of the catalog enough to include the portion about merging it

1. The API and frontend share identical tooling for Git hooks, linting and formatting. We will fight our tools less and encounter minimal friction.

   - In fact, we employ a number of hacks to install and configure pre-commit for the frontend. Merging it with the API eliminates the need for such hacks.

1. The entire system can be integration tested during releases. The real API, populated with test data, can even replace the Talkback server.

The `WordPress/openverse-api` repo will absorb the `WordPress/openverse-frontend` repo. The `WordPress/openverse-catalog` will also be merged, _later_.

### Reference

I'm following the steps listed below in a fork at [@dhruvkb/monopenverse](https://github.com/dhruvkb/monopenverse/). You can refer to the fork, but note that it is a comes from a place of haste and has not been treated with the same level of love and care that the final treatment will receive.

### Step 0: Prerequisites

#### Get the timing right

The first step will be to release the frontend, call a code freeze and pause work on it. This is to prevent the frontend repo from continuing to drift as we merge a snapshot of it with the API.

> This can prove difficult given how productive our team is, so we will need to channel this productivity towards the catalog in the meantime. I can foresee the end-to-end migration taking one week (ideal scenario) to one fortnight (worst case scenario).

Reviewer: > I can foresee the end-to-end migration taking one week (ideal scenario) to one fortnight (worst case scenario).

Could you unpack this time estimate a bit more for me? I am curious because I could see these tasks taking an hour or so and being treated like a deploy, where a few folks work on it together synchronously. I also think that would have benefit of minimizing the disruption to contributors. Are there long-running tasks I'm not considering?

Author: The missing implementation details (such as writing new documentation, updating references) are what will take the maximum time in the 1-2 week time range I proposed for this plan.

The technical merge is a and getting the functionality working is a day or two. The remaining 3 days are for identifying these issues and fixing them. I kept 5 more days as a backup in case something unforeseen comes up but given we do sufficient planning beforehand, we will not need the second week (underpromise, overdeliver 😉).

It might be hard to make a draft PR with the changes (because of the merge conflicts) but one thing we could do is start a new branch, do the merge on it and eventually replace `main` with it. That seems like a great way to see everything in action but a lot of (branch-name dependent actions will be affected when we promote the other branch).

In any case, the frontend cannot be merged via the GitHub UI, it will have be CLI. In all my usage of GitHub I don't think it's possible to make a PR from any repo to another. The GitHub UI only provides merge functionality from a fork to the upstream which is not this case.

Reviewer: I'd still really like to see a breakdown of the tasks involved in the merge, their execution order, and a time estimate for each step. We could do that when we write an implementation plan for this RFC. Two days maximum for a code freeze isn't too disruptive but definitely a concern in the case of high priority or critical bugs we might identify, even with a bug bash and small code freeze beforehand.

### Step 1: Merge with histories

This is a quick process.

1. Move the entire content of frontend inside a `frontend/` directory, except the following top-level files and folders. Please comment if you can add to this list.

   - `.github/`
   - `.editorconfig`
   - `justfile`
   - `.pre-commit-config.yaml`
   - `prettier.config.js`
   - `.prettierignore`
   - `.eslintrc.js` (need to update references in nested `eslintrc.js` files)
   - `.eslintignore`
   - <s>`.gitignore`</s> (better to move it into the `frontend/` directory and update some absolute paths)

> 1. Create the final commit on the `WordPress/openverse-frontend` repo. After the merge we might want to add a notice about the migration to the `README.md` file but GitHub's built-in archival process could suffice here.

Reviewer: I think we _definitely_ want to add a README notice and use the GitHub archiving functionality together. The README information will crucially link to the new repository. We should also update the repo description with the new url as well, here:

![CleanShot 2022-12-02 at 13 20 13](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/6351754/205359869-16d87694-9452-4b9c-b541-a07f57599ac5.png)

1. Merge this repo's `main` branch into the `WordPress/openverse-api` repo's `main` branch (see Git docs for `--allow-unrelated-histories`). There will be some conflicts but they will be small and infrequent. [[implementation details](#conflict-resolution)]

1. Create "stack: \*" labels to help with issue and PR management. Spoiler/foreshadowing: these labels will be used for more things later.

1. Migrate issues from `WordPress/openverse-frontend` to `WordPress/openverse-api`. @obulat's has done prior work in this department (when we migrated from CC Search to Openverse) but that might not be as useful because in this case, we can directly transfer the issues, retaining all their comments. Apply the "stack: frontend" label to them. [[implementation details](#issue-transfer)]

With this done, we can archive the frontend repo.

#### Conflict resolution

The following conflicts may occur during merge.

- `.prettierignore`: concatenate
- `.pre-commit-config.yaml`: use from [dhruvkb/monopenverse](https://github.com/dhruvkb/monopenverse)
- Workflows can conflict but they can be renamed and kept alongside each other, _for now_.

#### Issue transfer

> As far as I can tell, issue transfer can only be performed via the GitHub GraphQL API ([docs](https://docs.github.com/en/graphql/reference/mutations#transferissue)) and not via the REST API. From my limited testing, transferred issues seem to retain labels (provided they exist in the target repo).

Reviewer: I wrote a script in my previous monorepo exploration to transfer issues from one repo (`openverse/service` is the sample name I use, `WordPress/openverse-frontend` would be a concrete example, into another repo:

`gh api -X GET repos/openverse/service/issues -f pulls=false -f state=all --jq '.[].number' --paginate | xargs -n 1 -I num gh issue transfer num openverse/monorepo -R openverse/service`

In testing it worked quite well, and quickly.

Author: Thanks! I've included the command in the RFC itself in f2a9d81.

   we're looking for.

1. Meta-issues:

   **Current criticism:** If an issue spans more than a single layer of the
   stack, we need to open a meta issue in `WordPress/openverse`, open sub-issues
   in each of the different repos, then manually close meta issues after the
   sub-issues are closed. Same goes for PRs. We make individual PRs for every
   layer and then have to cross-reference them so that reviewers can see the
   full picture. Meta issues are good when a work needs to split into subtasks,
   but they are not good for cross-repo work splitting, especially when the work
   happens completely outside the knowledge of the meta-issue.

   **Monorepo solution:** A monorepo allows our cross-layer PRs to be viewed
   more holistically and be reviewed as a complete change.

1. No more sync:

   Current criticism: We use complex sync workflows to keep files in sync. Some
   workflows need to by synced to some repos only. Some workflows shouldn't even
   be in the repo they're synced from. Some files need subtle differences so we
   compile Jinja templates for them. We also sync GitHub labels and branch
   management rules. It's a mess (I would know!).

>    **Monorepo solution:** A monorepo would just eliminates all of this and saves

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   **Monorepo solution:** A monorepo eliminates all of this and saves
```

small grammar nit

   which the API already has a framework that other repos can just use.

1. Infra included:

   **Current criticism:** Our deployment workflows have code duplication.
   Secrets are stored in lots of repos, we keep secrets synced using Terraform.
   Containers are used in the infra repo but published in their individual
   repos.

   **Monorepo solution:** Monorepo enables the infra to coexist with the code
   (albeit in a separate module). Apart from the (encrypted) private secrets,
   the IaC could be open-sourced similar to the rest of the codebase. Our
   deployment workflows can share code and deployment secrets.

1. GitHub Milestones:

   Milestones are confined by repository boundaries. To have milestones that
   cover issues in different layers of our stack, the only way is for them to be
   in a monorepo. This is a limitation imposed by GitHub and there is no
   workaround for this.

The overarching theme is that there are workarounds for everything. We have been
working with split repos quite productively for over a year. My proposition is
the the monorepo solutions are better than workarounds.

> The [integration](#step-4-integration) section in the latter part of the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The [integration](#step-4-integration) section in the latter part of the
```

This appears out of date, as Step 4 now refers to a documentation merge.

document describes more interesting outcomes made possible by the monorepo. They

> may or may not be exclusive to monorepos but they're surely made easier by it.

Reviewer: 👍

1. The API’s comprehensive tooling for developer documentation can benefit
   frontend devs and create a unified docs site for contributors.

1. The merge of two JavaScript codebases provides fertile ground for testing
   `pnpm` workspaces.

   - It also allows us to merge the browser extension later and split the design
     system/component library stuff into a separate package.

1. The API is already organised by stack folders so the `frontend/` directory
   will fit right in with the others like `api/` and `ingestion_server/`.
   Similarly the scripts repo is nicely organised in folders, reducing
   conflicts.

1. The API and frontend share identical tooling for Git hooks, linting and
   formatting. We will fight our tools less and encounter minimal friction.

   - The frontend's approach for `pre-commit` expanded this type of usage to the
     API as well!

   - We're expanding the use of double-quoted strings to JavaScript to further
     unify our style guides.

1. The entire system can be integration tested during releases. The real API,
   populated with test data, can replace the Talkback server as long as we
   disable network calls and make output deterministic.

> The `WordPress/openverse` repo will absorb the `WordPress/openverse-api` and

Reviewer: Another great benefit to this that we've mentioned previously is that `WordPress/openverse` is a great, simple name and logical entrypoint to the code for our users.

continuing to drift as we merge a snapshot of them into the
`WordPress/openverse` repo.

This can prove difficult given how productive our team is, so we will need to
channel this productivity towards the catalog in the meantime. I can foresee the
end-to-end migration taking one week (ideal scenario) to becoming workable
again, and another week (for us to iron out any gaps in the docs and
references).

##### Timeline breakdown

- Day 1: Merging the repos and resolving conflicts, restoring broken workflows
  except deploys
- Day 2: Restoring deployment workflows including staging auto-deploy
- Day 3: Transfer of issues from individual repos to monorepo
- Day 4: Documentation fixes
- Day 5: Housekeeping

The second week is planned as a buffer in case any of these tasks ends up taking
more time than a day, if something breaks or if someone falls ill etc. The ideal
scenario is that we're completely back next week, the worst one takes two.

Note that in the transition period nothing will break. The old repos will
continue to exists as they are, till we ensure everything works and then we
archive the current split repos.

### Step 1: Merge with histories

> This should be quick save for a few merge conflicts. In case of conflict copy
> the code from [@dhruvkb/monoverse](https://github.com/dhruvkb/monoverse/).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This should be quick save for a few merge conflicts. In case of conflict copy
the code from [@dhruvkb/monoverse](https://github.com/dhruvkb/monoverse/).
```

This instruction feels a little clear to the point of being potentially destructive. For example, if some code that was merge conflicted is waaay out of date in `monoverse`. Should this be edited to specify something like 'configuration files' instead of any code? Even that might be concerning, for example if we've updated an action version in the real repository that is behind in monoverse.

Or is monoverse meant to be kept up to date with the real repositories?

Author: Keeping `monoverse` (which was a testing ground and experimentation repo) updated witn the three repos being merged will be a huge investment of time and effort with no significant return. I've updated the instructions in 5763d16 to **not copy** the code but rather the resolution logic from the commits.

| README.md               | Root-level docs                        |
| CODE_OF_CONDUCT.md      | Root-level docs                        |
| CONTRIBUTING.md         | Root-level docs                        |

```bash
$ git add . # Stage all renamed files
$ git commit -m "Nest code under \`frontend/\`"
```

Switch to the monorepo.

```bash
$ git pull frontend main --allow-unrelated-histories
```

Since we fixed these files when merging the API, almost all these conflicts are
redundant.

| Expected conflicts      | Resolution                      |
| ----------------------- | ------------------------------- |
| .github/CODEOWNERS      | Use existing                    |
| .prettierignore         | Use existing                    |
| .pre-commit-config.yaml | Uncomment the commented regions |
| .gitignore              | Use existing                    |
| prettier.config.js      | Use existing                    |
| README.md               | Use existing                    |
| CONTRIBUTING.md         | Use existing                    |

#### Housekeeping

1. Create "stack: \*" labels to help with issue and PR management.

>    Spoiler/foreshadowing: these labels will be used for more things later.

Reviewer: Perhaps this should happen _before_ the migration? If we created the labels in advance, we could then apply each label to _all issues_ in the respective repositories using the cli (I think this would be a very simple command to write), _before_ transferring. The labels would be preserved during the transfer.

Author: Yes, that makes more sense than transferring the issues, keeping a list of them and then applying labels.

1. Migrate issues from `WordPress/openverse-frontend` and
   `WordPress/openverse-api`. We can directly transfer the issues, retaining all
   their comments. Apply the "stack: frontend" / "stack: backend" label to them
   after moving.

```bash
# Substitute repo with WordPress/openverse-frontend and WordPress/openverse-api
$ gh api \
    -X GET \
    repos/WordPress/<repo>/issues \
    -f pulls=false \
    -f state=all \
    --jq '.[].number' \
    --paginate \
  | xargs \
    -n 1 \
    -I num \
  gh issue transfer \
    num \
    WordPress/openverse \
    -R WordPress/<repo>
```

> With this done, we can archive the API and frontend repo. An optional notice may
> be added to the `README.md` files for clarification before archiving.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With this done, we can archive the API and frontend repo. The following notice will
be added to the `README.md` files for clarification before archiving.
```

```md
> **Note**
>
> # This repository has moved to [WordPress/openverse](https://github.com/wordpress/openverse) as part of a monorepo.
```

Author: I updated your comment to ensure that merging it wouldn't break linting rules.

1. The merge of two JavaScript codebases provides fertile ground for testing `pnpm` workspaces.

   - It also allows us to merge the browser extension later and split the design system/component library stuff into a separate package.

1. The API is already organised by stack folders so the `frontend/` directory will fit right in with the others like `api/` and `ingestion_server/`. Similarly the scripts repo is nicely organised in folders, reducing conflicts.

1. The API and frontend share identical tooling for Git hooks, linting and formatting. We will fight our tools less and encounter minimal friction.

   - The frontend's approach for `pre-commit` expanded this type of usage to the API as well!

   - We're expanding the use of double-quoted strings to JavaScript to further unify our style guides.

> 1. The entire system can be integration tested during releases. The real API, populated with test data, can replace the Talkback server as long as we disable network calls and make output deterministic.

Reviewer 3: I love this! 🚀

Reviewer 3: We would have to make sure that the API response types _never_ differ from the sample data, though. For example, if we say that the license URL is always present, and it's present in the test data, but absent in the real API responses, that would break the app even though the tests pass.

Author: Next step would be integrating the catalog so the supplier of the data would also be a part of the tests 👍.

#### Update workflows

Workflows with major changes:

> - `ci_cd.yml` from the API will absorb `ci.yml` from the frontend

Reviewer 2: What approach will we take to avoid running API tests when only frontend code is changed and vice-versa? Combining the CI workflows will preclude us from using the workflow `files` filter. Did you have a different solution in mind?

Author: We can use the [`path-filter` action](https://github.com/dorny/paths-filter) to do that.

- `lint.yml` will be deleted

Updates:

- `migration_safety_warning.yml`
- `generate_pot.yml`

With this done, the development on the API and frontend can continue inside their subdirectories. The development of both parts will be independent, at least until we reach [long-term consolidation](#step-5-long-term-consolidation).

#### Deployment

##### Staging

The soon-to-be-ECS-based API and ECS-based frontend will continue to deploy to staging via the CI + CD pipeline, with deployment starting as soon as all CI checks have passed. They will use similar code as the frontend auto-deploy for staging used currently.

> These will be separate jobs with specific [path-based filters](https://github.com/dorny/paths-filter).

Reviewer 2: What is the benefit of using this `paths-filter` action rather than the built-in GitHub workflow `paths` settings for workflow triggers? Similar to my other question: https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/triggering-a-workflow#using-filters-to-target-specific-paths-for-pull-request-or-push-events

Author: This actions allows us to filter jobs instead of applying the filter to the entire workflow. This allows us to have a complete workflow where the job to deploy images to GHCR can run if all the CI test jobs have passed.

If the deploy is in a separate workflow, I don't think it's possible to run a workflow if a different workflow has passed.

Reviewer 2: It is possible to have cross-workflow dependencies, actually: https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/events-that-trigger-workflows#workflow_run

I only have two concerns with using the actions:

1. Extremely repetitive and annoying code to maintain in the workflows (need to guard each frontend/api job with the same repeated step at the top of the job). Note that we could use YAML anchors to fix this _slightly_ (still more repetition here compared to `paths`) but [`actionlint` does not currently support them](https://github.com/rhysd/actionlint/issues/133). We'd either need to contribute an upstream PR or stop using `actionlint`, the latter of which I think is unwise given how helpful it is at catching syntax errors locally.
2. It still actually uses a runner and worker time to complete whereas needs bypasses it entirely, therefore not eating up any of our quota. Considering the sheer number of jobs we're going to end up having in a single repository by the end of this migration, cutting down on the number of jobs that are run is prudent in this respect. This is one reason why we added all the concurrency configuration to our workflows, for example.

If you think either of these are not a concern, then that is fine. The first should be documented as an expectation and accepted trade off. I think the second would bite us later on, but I can accept that I may be being _too_ cautious.

One more thing that crossed my mind as I was writing this is whether our concurrency settings will need to change for jobs. My hunch is _no_, but it's worth looking into to confirm as they can be quite nasty to think through.

Author: I agree that `actionlint` has a lot of value so losing it would not be advisable. Let me update some of the code in `monoverse` to use `workflow_run`. Hopefully that'll allow us to keep the jobs distributed.

Author: `workflow_run` workflows depend on the ["OR" combination](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/events-that-trigger-workflows#workflow_run) of multiple workflows. This is different from `needs` which depends the ["AND" combination](https://docs.github.com/en/actions/using-workflows/workflow-syntax-for-github-actions#jobsjob_idneeds) of multiple jobs.

The annoying to maintain code might be true, but it can be overcome by abstracting the `paths-filter` job into a separate action with some `inputs` (similar to the `setup-env` action), thus limiting the annoyance to a single file.

Point 2 could be an issue as it will spin up a job and cancel it if the criterion fails, an alternative to that could be to have a job that only matches the condition of the paths. Let's say jobs called "is_api", "is_frontend" etc. The other jobs can `needs` on them so that they're skipped if their code paths are untouched. I think it will be a bit of a hassle to manage the pass/fail/skip cascades though so it's something that needs a bit of a dry-run first.

##### Production

> For production, we will not be able to use GitHub Releases and will have to use a manually-triggered workflow to build the assets and tag them. The tag can be set via a workflow input (simple) or can be calculated based on the update scope of major, minor or patch (not as simple).

Reviewer 2: Another way to simplify this is for us to switch to SHA based tags for release deployment. Rather than creating a new build, just use the build tagged with the `HEAD` SHA.

Author: The slight issue with SHA tags would be that it's harder to identify versioning with them. Given two hashes, it's not possible to say which is the newer version.

Reviewer 2: Ah, good point!
